So first things, if you could just tell us your name and where and when you were born.
Tell us your name, where were you born and what date were you born?
My name is Shafqat Rasool. I was born in Pakistan.
Born in Pakistan.
When were you born?
I was born in the year.
Roughly, your name and passport?
I was born in the year of the passport.
I was born in 1972.
I was born in 1973.
She doesn't know the year. At that time there were no certificates.
Some girls I knew they had a block.
They had no certificates.
So 1972, 1973.
What do you remember about the area that you grew up in?
There were many things.
The house, the family.
The family was together.
My father was a teacher.
When we had vegetables, fruits and vegetables, my father was fond of working.
They had servants basically to look after the farm and fresh vegetables.
All the vegetables they had grown from there.
They had so much actually that they would give it to the neighbors.
All the fruit and fresh vegetables.
The whole family was very fond of working.
There were many guests.
There was a big family.
There were a lot of visitors.
A lot of people would be visiting them.
I remember a lot of memories.
A lot of memories.
All the girls would get together and go out and talk at night.
You were very fond of the village.
Yes, very fond.
We had a lot of love and care for each other.
They were all people.
Even if they were not related, it seems like they were related.
They were not blood related, but they were very close.
We would go out and talk.
We would go to the village every month.
In summer holidays, she remembers that she would go to grandparents.
Like summer holidays, when they were off from school.
Like one month with the grandparents.
They used to have fun together there.
The nannies would come to drop them back to the parents.
Is there a favorite memory from being there or a favorite memory that you have?
There was a bloodbath.
I used to walk with them.
My elder grandmother used to come to the farm.
She used to go to the farm with her.
I remember her very well.
I think it was a pole hole.
Now they do it electronically.
Before that, they used to have that.
She remembers that.
When my mother came to Eid, my grandfather was a poor man.
I remember that.
She was very young, but she still remembers her granddad coming on Eid.
Bringing Eid to the daughter, which is her mom.
It's a tradition during Eid events.
Parents will bring special gifts and money to their daughter and grandchildren.
She said, I still remember that.
She can visualize.
She said every weekend, her and her other sister, a maid will go with them.
They will take a lot of fruit and vegetables for the grandparents and grandmother to go and see her every weekend.
They will go from school.
It was near when the meal was two meals.
About a meal and a half.
Did you walk with them?
They used to walk.
It was very safe.
They walked to the grandparents.
They used to walk to the grandparents.
It was very safe.
They walked to the grandparents' house, which is mom's side.
What made you come to the UK?
I got married.
I got married and came here.
When was this?
Do you remember when you got married?
I don't remember.
How many years have you been married?
It's been about 50 years.
55 years ago.
She can't remember the year, but about 55 years ago.
How old was she?
She was 18.
When I came to Karachi, I was in Egypt.
I was from Karachi.
From Karachi to Egypt.
My sister was there.
She stayed there for two weeks.
Did your uncle stay there?
Yes, he stayed there.
From Egypt, they spent two weeks in Egypt.
Because one of her sisters was there.
Then they came to the UK.
They came from Egypt.
They were from the government.
Egypt, okay.
Because her husband was sent with the military or something in Egypt.
So they thought to go and stay with them and then come to the UK.
When we came here, we didn't have any weapons.
We had a lot of weapons.
We had a train.
She said they had a train.
Where did they take the train?
London.
They had a flight probably to Heathrow.
Then they had a train from Heathrow to Newport.
She said it was very cold.
Very cold and dark.
It was very cold.
I didn't know the weather was like that.
It was not like this weather is better for them actually.
But she said when they came, it was very bad.
It was very hard.
They had no water.
No carpet.
No washing machine.
No washing.
So everything was washed.
Hand wash clothes.
They used to have the napkins for the children.
We washed with our napkins and all that.
There was no light.
There was no light inside.
There was no light outside.
Outside.
And what was the end?
There was a garden.
The entrance was inside.
It was very cold.
So they used to stop at the entrance.
It was not a door.
It was a door.
It was inside but it was outside.
It was within the household but it was right outside.
There was a park.
There was a big tub.
We took the water from there.
I was there.
We had to keep the water in the tub.
It was very hard.
Very very hard.
It was 10 pounds per month.
One pound was enough.
One pound obviously the whole of the grocery was included.
There was plenty of milk.
There was plenty of bread.
Bread was very thin.
It was very thin.
It was just a shling.
There was fire in the wood.
When fire would come I would cry my heart out.
When she came here, she put the fire and burned.
She used to be very upset and crying.
She said they've never done that in Pakistan.
She said she's out and put the food in.
No carpet.
They used to have a cardboard.
She used to walk the kids.
She used to walk.
Uncle used to come to work.
She used to take the kids to school and she'd go and get them.
Even when uncle used to come for lunch break at home,
she used to make sure that the food for lunch time is ready.
She used to go and pick the kids for the evening meal for the children.
She said it was very easy.
I was very surprised.
I don't know how many new things she had.
Imagination of the British.
As they say, the Windrush people say that they thought somebody would be there to welcome us.
This is how she imagined.
When she came here, she said it was completely like they were calling us here to work.
It was completely left on your own.
Especially when the women are coming at a young age and having families.
Not knowing the English.
What they imagined Britain wasn't like that.
They used to think, what is Britain?
What would be like Britain?
When you came, it was very different.
She said when I came, she was related.
She is Samina Lewis's mum.
She is related as well.
She said I got married long time after she came.
They had a lot of facilities by the time I came here and got married.
But their life was very hard.
Looking after the children, keeping the house warm, giving them baths.
They had only one room to put the fire.
They couldn't afford it.
There was no hot water.
No hot water.
The sun didn't hit us.
No fridge.
As she said already, no fridge.
No freezer.
There were no clothes.
They couldn't put the clothes out.
Especially in winter.
They had to make sure that they were in that room where the fire was on.
It was very hard.
She said obviously the generation like it would be.
The one after me, they got a much easier life.
Because when they came, they had no parents.
When I came, I was lucky.
They had a family.
They had no body.
But our children or grandchildren will have their parents here.
So we are getting that path.
Maybe a little bit easy.
Fingers crossed hopefully for them.
Definitely because you come in that early and lay a foundation for the next generations to be at ease in the way that they have it.
When you came, you said that your life was very hard.
We had no children.
We were left behind.
We were the only ones who could do the work.
You had to work hard.
We had to work hard.
But the children were doing the work.
There was no telephone.
We had to write letters.
I had to write letters.
You could understand some of the letters.
You had to wait for the letter.
Eight days to get there.
Eight days.
There was a telephone outside.
Then later on, the pay phone.
Then slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly.
Then obviously people started having telephones.
And then we had to book the call as well.
We had to book the call when we got our phone.
It was not a direct call at some point.
There was no phone in the kitchen.
There was no telephone.
There was only a cooker.
There was no microwave.
There was no kitchen.
There was only the cooker.
There was no reason to do anything.
There was no microwave.
There was no kitchen.
Small kitchen.
People saw that.
They said, Pakistan is so bad.
She said, coming here.
I thought, oh my God, we were so bad off in Pakistan.
We were so bad off at that time when we came here.
We were so bad off.
I was so embarrassed.
You know, I think because you imagine things when you're young.
You've got this different picture of UK.
The life will be like this and that.
You watch movies.
It's completely different to reality.
Especially for working class people.
What did you miss the most then?
There might have been a lot anyway.
What do you remember missing?
You know, you miss a lot of things.
What do you miss the most?
What did you miss the most?
I miss my sister.
She was sick.
She said someone is ill if death happens.
We miss our sisters.
Our parents passed away.
We miss our country.
Everything is here.
Regardless, we are here actually.
But your own country is like when we say back home.
But it is back home, isn't it?
This is our house.
This is what we lived.
More of our life.
But she did miss the most.
Her family.
The family system.
Love and care.
Also, they were very isolated.
There was a bathroom and a bathroom outside.
I was like, where are you taking me?
I was so old.
Our life is very different.
Regardless what they talk about Pakistan media,
if I'm honest, the life she is saying is much better in Pakistan.
If you are middle class people, you have a big house
and every bedroom has a bathroom.
So much luxury, you can have beds.
They have a social life as well.
Here it is much better.
My mum came and she was there.
My dad obviously worked in the shop.
He was from a good family.
But then I think when our parents came here to visit us,
my mum hated me seeing working and coming home
and doing the cooking and all that.
Is that the same?
Yeah.
Did your friends or family come over as well?
When they saw us, they saw us.
They had to do everything there.
They laughed a lot.
When they told us to clean the house,
I told them to clean the house.
We cleaned the toilets as well.
We cleaned the clothes, the dishes, the dishes.
They have made everything basically.
Here you have to do everything yourself.
And people do actually.
Not in a bad way they laugh.
They appreciate that they are better off there.
But we do believe as I already said,
where we are going to go, we will be there.
They came from Koshni.
When they came, it was very hard.
Very tough and hard.
Did they come together?
They came when they were 8 years old.
They were 8 years old.
Who was he?
He came with his uncle.
That's quite interesting.
He studied here.
He went back to Shantaroh for the first time.
Uncle came, her husband, sorry I just need to say uncle.
He passed away.
He came when he was 8 years old with his uncle.
Which was dad's brother.
He was in Newcastle.
He died.
This is how he was brought here when uncle was 8 years old.
He grew up here.
Then he went back to Pakistan to get married when she came here.
Despite having those roots here,
like his uncle was here,
even still when he got married and brought her here,
still there were difficulties.
As you mentioned roots,
what elements of the culture or the roots did you make an effort to preserve?
You mentioned that you used to meet families there.
What are the things that you try to preserve?
What are the things that you still try to preserve?
Whether you find it here or not.
Or any other festival that you do.
The same thing that we do.
Or do you do it the same way?
Here we do it the right way.
We give food to the children.
We try to do it.
On the weekend,
the parents will have grandchildren visiting all of them,
coming to one house.
It's an opportunity for all the brothers.
Everyone gets married and they've got their own houses.
They try to get together at one weekend to the parents' house.
The children go there.
They go to the houses.
Even our children have been to Pakistan and they loved it there.
Even Zinia says to me,
why did you marry my dad?
I said, sorry, it's too late now.
40 years ago.
I'm just going to change the memory card on here.
And then we've just got one more section.
But I'll just bring that card in here now.
I have one more question.
I was just thinking about, as you mentioned,
you took your children to Pakistan as well.
Why was that important for them to be able to see home?
They asked you about your children.
Yes, they wanted to go.
Why did they want to go and see that our parents are there?
All the parents are there.
They want to see their home.
They've got their own houses.
Their dad passed away in Pakistan.
But even before that, they wanted to go and see their aunties and uncles,
which is mom's brother and sister.
Not all of them are in the UK.
So it's good for them to go and see their aunties, uncles, cousins, extended families,
and even the grave of grandparents.
And our dad is buried there as well.
Sometimes they want to kind of connect to the roots as well.
They go to the village.
They want to see.
They pick up the animals there.
It's nice.
It's very relaxing.
You know, when they do the cane, sugar cane,
they really love it.
It's like how the parents or grandparents have lived here.
It's nice for them to know.
Sometimes the media doesn't kind of help.
But it is great, actually.
It's a good break for them to go.
They don't go because they can't work.
It's true, actually.
The people like, you know, they don't go to the village.
The people who are enjoying their life are in Pakistan.
People sometimes say to me, go back.
Because my in-laws were here anyway, so I couldn't go back.
If they had any house, I...
And I said to my daughter, what do we do?
Do we sell probably somewhere, a stall, actually, in the middle of somewhere?
Nobody will give me a job.
It's the way they craft, you know.
I know there are NGOs and all that, but it's just hard.
I mean, one thing I could say is I like, which I did not say,
there is the things we should follow, you know,
having like Christian, Muslims, respecting each other,
systems, you know, like with the benefit system.
It looks like they've taken it from Christianity and Muslims,
that we were supposed to give the charity on our wealth and our belongings,
and that money should be used for poor people, widows and all that.
And then also, you know, like how we stand in the queue,
can't corrupt, actually.
I can't give someone...
The bills, yeah, it starts to build.
So these are the things that other countries, like my country,
like if you say Pakistan, has, if I'm honest, actually,
the worst and the corrupt government in the past.
And this is where the poor is getting much poorer
and rich is, it doesn't matter to them.
Yeah, and it's a great opportunity to build communities
and for us to maintain like connections.
And you mentioned earlier on about, yeah, one, definitely,
roots and stories and networks and communities.
So how, yeah, just to bring it in, how is Age Alive?
How did you end up being involved in Age Alive?
It's like stay within the four walls.
It's not easy, especially as...
She said she tries to keep herself alive,
despite she's got the condition.
Just to, but she said coming out to the group,
it does help us to share.
Yeah, it's like it's their time, two, three hours,
it's her time for herself being with the group.
And what do you think about the time with Age Alive?
Is there one or multiple events that you can remember?
What do you think about the time with Age Alive?
You haven't been there for long, but do you remember
how many things you went to and how you felt good there?
When I came there, I was there.
When you go to St Mary's, what do you like there?
The exercise, yeah.
There was no exercise here.
There was a lot of talking, and everyone was sitting in their bags.
I think it's just sharing, sharing time, good time
with other people.
I think that's the word.
A cup of tea, a cup of tea, top of a tea, and yeah, it's nice.
It's nice to gather, yeah.
I think she likes that, so you're not on your own.
So coming to people and different local languages
is respecting each other and feel part of the group.
And why is that important for black, Asian, or ethnic groups
over 50, why is that?
Why is it important for us to go out and go to groups
or go somewhere where we can be respected and welcomed?
Why is it important?
It's important because you think about it.
You're upset at home, you're isolated, you're lonely.
That's the reason.
So it helps to deal with the isolation and loneliness.
She said she does come to, she's only been for a couple of weeks ago,
but she did say that she's got children who are obviously grown up,
so she goes one day for one son, and then she'll go probably stay with,
which is like a family, but it's nice to be part of the group
and of the same kind of ages.
And it's different, you know, it's not like you're going to be
in a group for a long time, but you're going to be in a group
and you don't feel like someone will say something to you
and you'll be in different cultures.
Do you feel that way?
No, I don't feel like that.
No, you're not in a group, right?
No, no, no.
I think she feels comfortable that nobody will say anything
because of her color or because of how she dressed up
and what her background belief and you know, all that.
So she feels that because we are all different, but we are all human,
she feels that she doesn't have to experience any kind of,
generally she hasn't experienced much of racism,
but still being with the group, people from the levels,
we understand each other better and sharing things.
Beautiful.
And speaking of sharing, is there any family heirlooms
or photographs or ornaments that you have kept as well?
Do you have any family heirlooms that you can share with us
or have kept in your own hands?
I have kept some old things, like this one.
Anything else? Any photographs?
Yes, I have a lot of photographs.
She said that...
Yes, I have kept them in my hand.
This is tradition.
She said they grew up, she said they got rid of all the ornaments
and decorations and stuff, but she said the good thing
she's got memories is the photographs.
A lot of photographs.
Why are they important to you?
For what is the photo important?
When the children were small, they didn't have any problems.
When they were small, they grew up.
They had a child.
They were like the
children of the olden days.
They were small.
She's got the photograph of her own children.
Her grandson is even married.
He's got a little baby as well.
It's nice when they come to show them
the childhood of children and even grandchildren
will have a look at the photos of their parents and grandparents.
It's a good memory to remember.
Sometimes they come to see the photos.
Yes, they do.
Sometimes you're sitting there and you're thinking
what shall I do?
You just go into the drawer and start looking.
All the photos of their parents, their sisters,
those who passed away, those who are with them.
It's just reminding all the good memories and good time
they had as a family.
Beautiful, huh?
Thank you. Thank you very much.
I think I'll ask.
Auntie said she'll go now.
So you can carry on what you need to do.